BALTIMORE — The bodies of six children were recovered after a fire engulfed a house in the northeast section of Baltimore early on Thursday, a fire official said.Their mother and her three other children escaped the home and were being treated at a hospital, said Chief Roman Clark, a spokesman for the Baltimore City Fire Department. A 9-month-old boy, a 2-year-old boy, two 3-year-old twin girls, and two other girls, ages 10 and 11, died in the fire, he said.One of the children who was hospitalized, an 8-year-old girl, had helped her 4- and 5-year-old siblings flee, Chief Clark said at a news conference.Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland, identified the mother as Katie Malone, who has worked in his Catonsville office for nearly 11 years. “She dutifully serves my constituents in the areas of immigration, postal services and the military,” he said in an email. Mr. Cummings and Chief Clark said Ms. Malone was the mother of the nine children. Mr. Cummings told reporters at an event in Baltimore that he had spoken with her family. “They’re still trying to wrap their arms around this, but we have made clear our office is going to do every single thing in our power” to help them, he said.Chief Clark said the father of the children had been at work when the fire happened.Firefighters arrived at the house, in the Cedmont neighborhood, at about 12:30 a.m. and saw the three-story building on fire. Chief Clark said the third floor had collapsed onto the second, and then the second onto the first.
After the flames were extinguished, he said, the authorities brought in an excavator and began clearing the debris, using cadaver dogs to help in the search.Chief Clark said that Ms. Malone and the 4- and 5-year-old children were in critical condition in the hospital, and that the 8-year-old was in serious condition but could be released on Thursday.The cause of the fire is under investigation, he said.Jenna Wiggins, who lives two doors from the house where the fire broke out, said firefighters had been forced to back off as the flames raged.“The whole house just collapsed,” she said. “Every time it looked like the flames went down, they just came back up again, and the roof fell in, and then one floor fell onto the floor below, and the house was just gone.”Ms. Wiggins recalled seeing the children playing outside and saying hello to them.“It’s just so hard, knowing the children have died,” she said.Officials at Epiphany Lutheran Church, less than two blocks from the home, said all the children had attended a school affiliated with the church. But the officials and parents who milled around outside declined to comment out of deference to the family. The church is well known for a red neon sign on its roof that is visible for miles. It reads, “God Is Love.”
Gary Gately reported from Baltimore, and Christine Hauser from New York. Eric Lichtblau contributed reporting from Baltimore, and Christopher Mele from New York.