

Photo






Senator Jeff Sessions, the nominee for attorney general, along the parade route for President Trump’s inauguration on Friday. Democrats pushed back a confirmation vote on him.

Credit
            Sam Hodgson for The New York Times        



WASHINGTON — A leading civil rights group on Tuesday denounced the Trump administration’s delay of legal cases to overhaul the Baltimore Police Department and challenge a voter ID law in Texas — two lawsuits that were major efforts of the Obama-era Justice Department. Senate Democrats, meanwhile, pushed back a confirmation vote on Senator Jeff Sessions as attorney general.Just hours after President Trump was inaugurated, the Justice Department on Friday filed requests to delay scheduled hearings in the two cases. Kristen Clarke, the executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, called the requests “astonishing.”“We are deeply concerned that this Justice Department is preparing to abandon its commitment to enforcement of our nation’s civil rights laws,” Ms. Clarke said in a telephone news conference.The motions cited only the change in administrations and the need for additional time to brief the department’s incoming leadership on the cases. A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment.



In the Texas lawsuit, the Justice Department had challenged the state’s law that required voters to show photo identification. And in Baltimore, the Obama Justice Department reached a deal in its closing days to impose greater oversight and training at the troubled Police Department. 


The warning shot by the lawyers’ committee signaled the intense scrutiny that liberal groups plan to bring to the Justice Department’s civil rights division, which has been a recurring partisan battleground over the years.“There are deep grounds for concern,” David Cole, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said in a telephone interview. “Trump and Sessions have made it very clear they take a different view of these issues.”The Justice Department has joined with the A.C.L.U. on two major civil rights cases that are still in the courts: a transgender rights case in Virginia and a voter discrimination case in North Carolina. Unlike the cases in Baltimore and Texas, the Justice Department has not signaled that it will seek any delays, but Mr. Cole said that “we’re very worried they might change their position.”Democratic administrations have generally been more aggressive than Republican ones about enforcing voting rights measures, hate crime statutes and other laws that seek to protect minorities from discrimination.The Trump administration has not yet announced a nominee to be assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. But the administration has installed two deputies as acting chiefs to run it in the interim.

One new deputy is Thomas Wheeler, who was general counsel to Vice President Mike Pence when Mr. Pence was the governor of Indiana. According to Mr. Wheeler’s cached biography on the website of his former law firm, he has extensive experience defending schools and municipalities against employment discrimination lawsuits.The other deputy, John M. Gore, helped with his law firm’s defense of several states’ redistricting plans, and was among the lawyers who represented Florida when it was sued over a disputed attempt to purge its voter rolls close to an election. He also sought to get the University of North Carolina dropped from a lawsuit challenging a state law barring transgender students from using bathrooms that correspond with their gender identities.



Ms. Clarke expressed “concerns” about both men and sought to link the delayed hearings to Mr. Trump’s baseless claim at a meeting on Monday with congressional leaders that millions of unauthorized immigrants illegally voted for Hillary Clinton in November’s election. She called that claim “an invitation for voter suppression tactics to be put on the books.”Her attack came as Democrats forced a one-week delay on a Senate Judiciary Committee vote on Mr. Sessions’s confirmation. Ultimately, Mr. Sessions appears almost certain to be confirmed by the Senate, where he has served as a Republican from Alabama since 1997.Democrats have made Mr. Sessions’s civil rights record in Alabama and Washington one of their main points of attack, reviving questions that have dogged him for 30 years about his racial attitudes and his handling of civil rights litigation.Mr. Sessions, in hundreds of pages of written answers released this week by the Judiciary Committee, often gave measured and carefully worded statements about his views on civil rights and revealed few details about the course he would take as attorney general.Over and over, Mr. Sessions wrote that he would be “vigilant in the full enforcement of all federal laws” — including hate crime measures and civil rights legislation that he opposed in the Senate.Mr. Sessions broke with Mr. Trump over the president’s recent Twitter attack on Representative John Lewis, a Georgia Democrat, after Mr. Lewis said he did not consider him a legitimate president.Asked whether he agreed with Mr. Trump that the congressman was “all talk, talk, talk,” Mr. Sessions wrote that Mr. Lewis “was a key figure in the civil rights movement and has my utmost respect.”Mr. Sessions paid homage to the civil rights movement in his home state and said the Justice Department has “a clear role to play in remedying” inequality that persists in how laws are enforced.He is also attracting support from a Republican organization that is airing television ads in the Washington area calling him a “civil rights champion” and urging people to back his nomination. (One photo features him with Mr. Lewis.)



The ads are sponsored by 45Committee, a tax-exempt group that can accept unlimited contributions without disclosing donors. The committee is linked to Todd Ricketts, a co-owner of the Chicago Cubs and Mr. Trump’s pick for deputy commerce secretary.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.
A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2017, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Civil Rights Group Rebukes Trump Justice Department Over Delay on Two Cases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe





























