
■ President Trump, Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, and their wives will fly to Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach, Fla., for dinner and a weekend of golf.■ Treasury Secretary-nominee Steven Mnuchin’s confirmation vote, originally slated for a rare Saturday session in the Senate, has been pushed to Monday. 


Trump rejects Abrams as deputy secretary of stateMr. Trump overruled his newly minted secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, and rejected the secretary’s choice for his deputy at the department, two people briefed on the decision said Friday.The deputy’s job was denied for Elliott Abrams, a conservative who had served under President Ronald Reagan and President George W. Bush, deals a blow to Mr. Tillerson in his first week on the job. The rejection of Mr. Abrams leaves Mr. Tillerson without a sherpa to help guide the first-time government official around the State Department headquarters.



Mr. Trump had a productive meeting with Mr. Abrams on Tuesday, according to a White House official and a person close to Mr. Abrams. But after it took place, Mr. Trump learned of Mr. Abrams’s pointed criticisms of the president when he was running for president, the administration official said. Among those criticisms was a column headlined “When You Can’t Stand Your Candidate,” which appeared in May 2016 in The Weekly Standard. 


Mr. Trump has been increasingly focused on who was with him or against him during his campaign, according to several people who have spoken with him in recent days.Mr. Tillerson had argued strongly for Mr. Abrams. So had Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and a senior adviser. Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas who is closely aligned with friends of Mr. Abrams’, and some members of the pro-Israel lobbying group Aipac, had been reaching out to Democratic senators to impress upon them the importance of Mr. Abrams receiving Senate confirmation.Aides to Mr. Trump did not respond to an email seeking comment.Democrats turn up heat on FlynnThe revelation that Michael T. Flynn, President Trump’s national security adviser, apparently discussed sanctions with Russia’s ambassador to the United States in the weeks before the inauguration has given Democrats a new cudgel to revive discussions of Mr. Trump’s ties to Russian President Vladimir V. Putin.And they are swinging it.Representative Eric Swalwell of California, the ranking Democrat on the C.I.A. subcommittee of the House Intelligence Committee, called it “a crime for someone outside of our government to negotiate with foreign entities on our nation’s behalf.”


            The @WhiteHouse should immediately SUSPEND National Security Advisor Flynn & REVOKE access to classified information until investigated. https://t.co/fNt4jHXmQ7  —
        Rep. Eric Swalwell (@RepSwalwell)
        Feb. 10, 2017



Senators Christopher S. Murphy of Connecticut and Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, both Democrats, were similarly scathing in a joint statement. Said Mr. Murphy:“There is no good way to explain today’s report that Michael Flynn was coordinating sanctions relief for Russia before his boss was inaugurated. Either Donald Trump directed his National Security Adviser to undermine U.S. foreign policy on Russia, or Michael Flynn went rogue and did it on his own. Then he either lied to the Vice President or the Vice President went on television to lie to the American people. Whatever transpired, the President needs to get his White House under control.”Candidate for solicitor general drops outWith the legal fight over President Trump’s travel ban apparently headed for the Supreme Court, a leading contender for the job of arguing the government’s cases before the highest court has dropped out of consideration.The candidate, Charles J. Cooper, said he was withdrawing as a possible nominee for solicitor general of the United States “after witnessing the treatment of my friend Jeff Sessions,” who was approved as attorney general Wednesday evening after bruising attacks by Senate Democrats over his civil rights record.Mr. Cooper, a conservative Washington lawyer who argued against gay marriage in an important California case, said that after what Mr. Sessions “had to endure at the hands of a partisan opposition that will say anything and do anything to advance their political interests, I am unwilling to subject myself, my family, and my friends to such a process.”



His withdrawal appears to leave George T. Conway, a New York lawyer who is married to Kellyanne Conway, a top White House aide, as the leading contender for solicitor general. Mr. Trump said Thursday that he expected to select a new nominee in about a week. Whoever gets confirmed for the job could end up arguing the legality of Mr. Trump’s travel ban before the Supreme Court.‘Big, beautiful’ — and priceyNo wonder Mr. Trump wants the Mexicans to pay for it.The wall on the southern border — really a set of fences and walls — would take three and a half years to build and would cost $21.6 billion, according to an internal report by the Department of Homeland Security that was seen by Reuters.That’s well over the $12 billion estimated by Mr. Trump during the campaign, and the upper bound of $15 billion cited by Republican leaders in Congress.At a time when federal deficits are again expected to grow, the amount is not pocket change. As the population ages and draws on Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, the Congressional Budget Office is already expecting the government to heap nearly $10 trillion onto the federal debt over the coming decade — and that is with statutory caps on domestic and military spending. Mr. Trump has already vowed to bust through those caps on the military side of the ledger, something that would take an act of Congress.Now he’ll have to pay extra for his promised wall — either out of existing domestic programs or above the nondefense caps.Presidential viewing habits ... exposedMr. Trump is still pretty miffed that a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously upheld a restraining order against his travel ban from seven majority-Muslim countries.


            LAWFARE: "Remarkably, in the entire opinion, the panel did not bother even to cite this (the) statute." A disgraceful decision!         —
        Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)
        Feb. 10, 2017



We can also deduce what he was watching on television: MSNBC’s Morning Joe.


            Here we go -- @Morning_Joe full screen at 8:03. Trump tweet at 8:15 pic.twitter.com/OApcgSIiZY  —
        Ethan Klapper (@ethanklapper)
        Feb. 10, 2017



Wonder why it took 12 minutes to compose that post on Twitter.That sudden talk with ChinaOn Thursday night, The New York Times published a scoop: the president of the United States had not spoken to the president of China, Xi Jinping, who was icing him out over his unorthodox call with the leader of Taiwan during his transition to power, and his suggestion that just maybe, Washington would no longer follow the “One China” policy (which affirms that Taiwan is a province of the mainland).



Hours later, the White House issued a statement that, hey, not only had Mr. Trump just spoken to Mr. Xi, he had also expressed support for the One China policy after all — something Mr. Trump had said he would do only in return for concessions.The Times story was rewritten accordingly, capturing the news.But Mr. Trump does not accept the chronology — at least not publicly.


            The failing @nytimes does major FAKE NEWS China story saying "Mr.Xi has not spoken to Mr. Trump since Nov.14." We spoke at length yesterday!         —
        Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)
        Feb. 10, 2017



The campaign never endsHillary Clinton has been slow to emerge after her November defeat. But there she was on social media Thursday night, praising the unanimous decision by a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals to uphold a nationwide restraining order against Mr. Trump’s travel ban for seven majority-Muslim countries.


            3-0         —
        Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton)
        Feb. 10, 2017



To which Kellyanne Conway, the Trump campaign-manager-turned-White House adviser, had a reply.


            PA, WI, MI. https://t.co/wqhYCU2qe2  —
        Kellyanne Conway (@KellyannePolls)
        Feb. 10, 2017



Winning is everything.House Republicans face a backlashFirst came the video of Representative Mike Coffman of Colorado sneaking out a back door to avoid the angry crowd gathered for his town hall meeting — but his suburban Denver district is swingy.


            While more than 100 people were waiting to meet with him, Mike Coffman sneaks out early from his own community event. #9News pic.twitter.com/NAZlXTKgQm  —
        Nelson Garcia (@9NewsEducation)
        Jan. 14, 2017





Then Representative Tom McClintock of California had to flee under guard as constituents in Roseville demanded to know why he was so bent on repealing the Affordable Care Act. But hey, it’s California — even though his turf outside Sacramento isn’t exactly Berkeley.

Tom McClintock Town Hall Feb 2017 Video by Julia Sweeney

But Utah? On Wednesday, it was Representative Jason Chaffetz’s turn — in the reddest of states, in the Salt Lake City suburb Cottonwood Heights.


            Cancer survivor — who relies on Planned Parenthood for care — asks Chaffetz: “Why are you trying to take [it] away?” pic.twitter.com/yexjMZ7wz6  —
        Dan Diamond (@ddiamond)
        Feb. 10, 2017






            Cong Chaffetz being drowned out by angry crowd at his town hall @UtahIndivisible @IndivisibleTeam pic.twitter.com/AvBz14u0Yj  —
        Kyung Lah (@KyungLahCNN)
        Feb. 10, 2017



It’s getting ugly out there.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.
A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2017, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: State Department; Personal Beef Leads President to Reject Tillerson’s Pick for Deputy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe





