

Photo






Some Americans are wearing safety pins amid fears of abuse against minorities, immigrants, women and members of the L.G.B.T. community.

Credit
            Andrew Lichtenstein/Corbis, via Getty Images        



Have you seen an increase in hate speech where you live? Have you noticed any increase in bullying, threats or other hateful actions? What can we, as individuals and as a nation, do about hate crimes directed at people because of their ethnicity, gender, race or religion?In “Attacks on Muslim Americans Fuel Increase in Hate Crime, F.B.I. Says,” Eric Lichtblau writes:The F.B.I. reported Monday that attacks against American Muslims surged last year, driving an overall increase in hate crime against all groups.
The data, which is the most comprehensive look at hate crime nationwide, expanded on previous findings by researchers and outside monitors, who have noted an alarming rise in some types of crimes tied to the vitriol of this year’s presidential campaign and the aftermath of terrorist attacks at home and abroad since 2015.
That trend appears to have spiked in just the last week, with civil rights groups and news organizations reporting dozens of verbal or physical assaults on minorities and others that appear to have been fueled by divisions over the election.
In its report on Monday, the F.B.I. cataloged a total of 5,818 hate crimes in 2015 — a rise of about 6 percent over the previous year — including assaults, bombings, threats, and property destruction against minorities, women, gays and others.
Attacks against Muslim Americans saw the biggest surge. There were 257 reports of assaults, attacks on mosques and other hate crimes against Muslims last year, a jump of about 67 percent over 2014. It was the highest total since 2001, when more than 480 attacks occurred in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.Students: Read the entire article, then tell us:— Have you noticed any increase in bullying, threats or other hateful actions where you live?— What positive things have you, your family, your school or your community done to make your world a more kind, supportive and safe place for all people? Do these things take time? Money? Courage? Organization or advance planning? Explain.

— What suggestions do you have for our nation as a whole? For adults? For our government leaders?— The Times reports that “as a show of support, groups of people across America are attaching safety pins to their lapels, shirts and dresses to signify that they are linked, willing to stand up for the vulnerable.” What do you think about symbolic acts like this? Do you think they can make a positive difference?Students 13 and older are invited to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once your comment is accepted, it will be made public. 
