WASHINGTON — A leading civil rights group on Tuesday denounced the Trump administration’s delay of legal cases to overhaul the Baltimore Police Department and challenge a voter ID law in Texas — two lawsuits that were major efforts of the Obama-era Justice Department. Senate Democrats, meanwhile, pushed back a confirmation vote on Senator Jeff Sessions as attorney general.
“We are deeply concerned that this Justice Department is preparing to abandon its commitment to enforcement of our nation’s civil rights laws,” Ms. Clarke said in a telephone news conference.
The motions cited only the change in administrations and the need for additional time to brief the department’s incoming leadership on the cases. A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment.
The warning shot by the lawyers’ committee signaled the intense scrutiny that liberal groups plan to bring to the Justice Department’s civil rights division, which has been a recurring partisan battleground over the years.
“There are deep grounds for concern,” David Cole, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said in a telephone interview. “Trump and Sessions have made it very clear they take a different view of these issues.”
The Justice Department has joined with the A.C.L.U. on two major civil rights cases that are still in the courts: a transgender rights case in Virginia and a voter discrimination case in North Carolina. Unlike the cases in Baltimore and Texas, the Justice Department has not signaled that it will seek any delays, but Mr. Cole said that “we’re very worried they might change their position.”
Democratic administrations have generally been more aggressive than Republican ones about enforcing voting rights measures, hate crime statutes and other laws that seek to protect minorities from discrimination.
The Trump administration has not yet announced a nominee to be assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. But the administration has installed two deputies as acting chiefs to run it in the interim.
Her attack came as Democrats forced a one-week delay on a Senate Judiciary Committee vote on Mr. Sessions’s confirmation. Ultimately, Mr. Sessions appears almost certain to be confirmed by the Senate, where he has served as a Republican from Alabama since 1997.
Mr. Sessions, in hundreds of pages of written answers released this week by the Judiciary Committee, often gave measured and carefully worded statements about his views on civil rights and revealed few details about the course he would take as attorney general.
Over and over, Mr. Sessions wrote that he would be “vigilant in the full enforcement of all federal laws” — including hate crime measures and civil rights legislation that he opposed in the Senate.
Asked whether he agreed with Mr. Trump that the congressman was “all talk, talk, talk,” Mr. Sessions wrote that Mr. Lewis “was a key figure in the civil rights movement and has my utmost respect.”
Mr. Sessions paid homage to the civil rights movement in his home state and said the Justice Department has “a clear role to play in remedying” inequality that persists in how laws are enforced.