WASHINGTON — The federal government’s frantic response to the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, sparked renewed debate Wednesday at the Supreme Court, as justices considered whether top officials in the George W. Bush administration could be held responsible for abuses against Muslim immigrants and others rounded up after the attacks.
Conservatives on the court, citing the extraordinary peril of that time, appeared willing to give the officials legal protection from lawsuits arising from the detention policies they approved after the attacks.
But some of the more liberal justices did not appear so forgiving.
Even in a time of national emergency, government officials sometimes “can go too far,” Justice Stephen G. Breyer said. “And if they have gone too far, it is our job to say that.”
The case centers on the government’s roundup and mistreatment of 762 men who were in the United States illegally — mainly Muslims from Arab and South Asian nations — in the days and weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Not one of the men was found to have had any connection to the attacks or to terrorism, yet some were held in detention centers in Brooklyn and New Jersey for as long as eight months under harsh conditions and with sporadic access to family or lawyers.
In seeking to head off the prospect of additional, “follow on” attacks, Mr. Ashcroft and the Justice Department approved a “hold until cleared” policy for the prisoners. That meant the F.B.I. had to affirmatively declare a prisoner was not a terrorist threat before he was released to face standard immigration proceedings.
The policy was divisive even within the government. One of the officials being sued in the case — James W. Ziglar, who was the immigration commissioner at the time and objected to some of the Justice Department’s detention policies as improper — has his own lawyer in the case because of the clashing interests. “We didn’t want Jim lumped in with others,” his lawyer, William A. McDaniel Jr., said in an interview.
The Supreme Court, she said, “has a historic role to play in ensuring that race and religion do not take the place of legitimate grounds for suspicion and in deterring future federal officials from creating government policy to do the same.”
But Ian H. Gershengorn, the acting solicitor general, said it would be a troubling expansion of the law for top government officials to be held personally liable in such a situation.
As the officials set policies in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, “you couldn’t tell who was and who was not” a possible terrorist, Mr. Gershengorn said. In that situation, he said, the decision to hold everyone until they were cleared was driven “not by invidious intent, but by the desire to avoid the premature and inadvertent release of a dangerous terrorist.”
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. appeared sympathetic to that view. He told Ms. Meeropol that he was concerned that expanding the law to hold government officials personally liable for their actions in such cases could deter people from entering the government.
“They’re going to say, ‘Well, gosh, if, you know, I’m wrong, I’m going to be sued,’” Justice Roberts said.
“We don’t want people forming policy to have to worry” that they will be required to pay personal damages if that policy is found to be in error, he said.
Justice Breyer said that in the immediate aftermath of the attacks, “I can understand that the first reaction of the law enforcement authorities is, pick up anybody you might think is connected, and we’ll worry about the rest of it later.”
But he and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said they were troubled that many of the prisoners were kept in jail for many months after the attacks.
“You know from Day 1,” Justice Ginsburg told Mr. Gershengorn, “that many of them have nothing to do with terrorists, and yet you allow that system that might have been justified in October to persist for months and months when these people are being held in the worst possible conditions of confinement.”
Justices Ginsburg and Breyer may be outnumbered in the final vote, however. Two of their liberal colleagues on the court — Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan — have recused themselves from the case because of apparent conflicts involving their posts before joining the court, and that has helped the government’s chances of winning. Justice Sotomayor was formerly a judge on the Second Circuit, and Justice Kagan was formerly the solicitor general.